.\" This file is part of GNU Rush.
.\" Copyright (C) 2016-2019 Sergey Poznyakoff
.\"
.\" GNU Rush is free software; you can redistribute it and/or modify
.\" it under the terms of the GNU General Public License as published by
.\" the Free Software Foundation; either version 3, or (at your option)
.\" any later version.
.\"
.\" GNU Rush is distributed in the hope that it will be useful,
.\" but WITHOUT ANY WARRANTY; without even the implied warranty of
.\" MERCHANTABILITY or FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.  See the
.\" GNU General Public License for more details.
.\"
.\" You should have received a copy of the GNU General Public License
.\" along with GNU Rush.  If not, see <http://www.gnu.org/licenses/>.
.TH RUSH 8 "May 15, 2019" "RUSH" "Rush User Reference"
.SH NAME
rush \- restricted user shell
.SH SYNOPSIS
\fBrush\fR\
 [\fB\-htTx\fR]\
 [\fB\-C\fR \fICHECK\fR]\
 [\fB\-D\fR \fIATTR\fR[\fB,\fIATTR\fR...]]\
 [\fB\-c\fR \fICOMMAND\fR]\
 [\fB\-d\fR \fINUMBER\fR]\
 [\fB\-i\fR]\
 [\fB\-u\fR \fIUSER\fR]\
 [\fB\-\-debug\fR \fINUMBER\fR]\
 [\fB\-\-dump=\fIATTR\fR[\fB,\fIATTR\fR...]]\
 [\fB\-\-help\fR]\
 [\fB\-\-show\-default\fR]\
 [\fB\-\-trace\fR]\
 [\fB\-\-usage\fR]\
 [\fB\-\-version\fR]\
 [\fIFILE\fR] 
.SH NOTE
This manpage is a short description of GNU \fBrush\fR.  For a detailed
discussion, including examples and usage recommendations, refer to the
manual \fBGNU Rush -- a restricted user shell\fR, available in texinfo
format.  If the \fBinfo\fR reader and the rush documentation are
properly installed on your system, the command
.PP
.RS +4
.B info rush
.RE
.PP
should give you access to the complete manual.
.PP
You can also view the manual using the info mode in
.BR emacs (1),
or find it in various formats online at
.PP
.RS +4
.B http://www.gnu.org.ua/software/rush/manual
.RE
.PP
If any discrepancies occur between this manpage and the
\fBManual\fR, the later shall be considered the authoritative
source.
.SH DESCRIPTION
GNU \fBrush\fR is a restricted user shell, designed for sites that provide
limited remote access to their resources, such as svn or git
repositories, scp, or the like.
.PP
Upon startup \fBrush\fR analyzes its command line and examines the set
of configuration rules to determine what kind of access the user is to
be granted.
.SH OPTIONS
.TP
\fB\-c\fR \fICOMMAND\fR
Execute \fICOMMAND\fR.
.TP
\fB\-C\fR, \fB\-\-security\-check=\fICHECK\fR
Add or remove configuration security check.  The argument is one of
the following:
.RS
.TP
.B all
Enable all checks.
.TP
.B owner
Check if the file is owned by root.
.TP
.BR iwgrp ", " groupwritablefile
Check if the file is not group writable.
.TP
.BR iwoth ", " worldwritablefile
Check if the file is not world writable.
.TP
.BR dir_iwgrp ", " groupwritabledir
Check if the directory where the file resides is not group writable.
.TP
.BR dir_iwoth ", " worldwritabledir
Check if the directory where the file resides is not world writable.
.TP
.BR link
Check if the file is not a symbolic link to a file residing in a group
or world writable directory.
.RE
.TP
\fB\-d\fR, \fB\-\-debug=\fINUMBER\fR
Set debugging level.  The greater is the \fINUMBER\fR, the more
verbose is the logging.  The debugging information is reported via
.BR syslog (3)
using
.BR authpriv,
priority
.BR debug .
Maximum meaningful value for \fINUMBER\fR is \fB3\fR.
.TP
\fB\-D\fR, \fB\-\-dump=\fIATTR\fR[\fB,\fIATTR\fR...]
Request dump mode.  Arguments are the names of the attributes to be
dumped, or the word
.B all
standing for all attributes.  Refer to the GNU Rush manual for a
detailed description.
.TP
.B \-i
Emulate interactive access.  Use this option to test whether and how
does your configuration allow interactive access.
.TP
.B \-\-show\-default
Show default configuration.
.TP
\fB\-t\fR, \fB\-\-test\fR, \fB\-\-lint
Run in test mode.  When this option is given, the following occurs:
.RS
.nr step 1 1
.IP \n[step].
All diagnostic messages are redirected to standard error, instead of
syslog.
.IP \n+[step].
If a single non-option argument is present, it is taken as a
name of the configuration file to use.
.IP \n+[step].
The configuration file is parsed.  If parsing fails, the program
exits with the code 1.
.IP \n+[step].
If the \fB\-c\fR option is present, \fBrush\fR processes
its argument as usual, except that the command itself is not executed.
.RE
.TP
\fB\-T
Test scanner mode.  This option is used by the \fBrush\fR testsuite.
.TP
\fB\-u\fR, \fB\-\-user=\fINAME\fR
Supplies user name for use with \fB\-\-test\fR.
.TP
\fB\-x\fR, \fB\-\-trace\fR
Print parser traces.  When used twice, print lexical scanner traces as
well.  This option is intended for debugging.
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR rush.rc (5),
.BR rushlast (1),
.BR rushwho (1).
.SH AUTHORS
Sergey Poznyakoff
.SH "BUG REPORTS"
Report bugs to <bug-rush@gnu.org.ua>.
.SH COPYRIGHT
Copyright \(co 2016-2019 Sergey Poznyakoff
.br
.na
License GPLv3+: GNU GPL version 3 or later <http://gnu.org/licenses/gpl.html>
.br
.ad
This is free software: you are free to change and redistribute it.
There is NO WARRANTY, to the extent permitted by law.
.\" Local variables:
.\" eval: (add-hook 'write-file-hooks 'time-stamp)
.\" time-stamp-start: ".TH [A-Z_][A-Z0-9_.\\-]* [0-9] \""
.\" time-stamp-format: "%:B %:d, %:y"
.\" time-stamp-end: "\""
.\" time-stamp-line-limit: 20
.\" end:
