.\" This file is part of GNU Rush.
.\" Copyright (C) 2016-2019 Sergey Poznyakoff
.\"
.\" GNU Rush is free software; you can redistribute it and/or modify
.\" it under the terms of the GNU General Public License as published by
.\" the Free Software Foundation; either version 3, or (at your option)
.\" any later version.
.\"
.\" GNU Rush is distributed in the hope that it will be useful,
.\" but WITHOUT ANY WARRANTY; without even the implied warranty of
.\" MERCHANTABILITY or FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.  See the
.\" GNU General Public License for more details.
.\"
.\" You should have received a copy of the GNU General Public License
.\" along with GNU Rush.  If not, see <http://www.gnu.org/licenses/>.
.TH RUSHLAST 1 "August 17, 2016" "RUSHLAST" "Rush User Reference"
.SH NAME
rushlast \- show listing of last Rush logins
.SH SYNOPSIS
\fBrushlast\fR\
 [\fB\-Hh\fR]\
 [\fB\-F\fR \fISTRING\fR]\
 [\fB\-f\fR \fIDIR\fR]\
 [\fB\-n\fR \fINUMBER\fR]\
 [\fB\-\-file=\fIDIR\fR]\
 [\fB\-\-format=\fISTRING\fR]\
 [\fB\-\-forward\fR]\
 [\fB\-\-help\fR]\
 [\fB\-\-no\-header\fR]\
 [\fB\-\-number=\fINUMBER\fR]\
 [\fB\-\-usage\fR]\
 [\fB\-\-version\fR]\
 [\fIUSER\fR...]
.SH NOTE
This manpage is a short description of \fBrushlast\fR.  For a detailed
discussion, including examples and usage recommendations, refer to the
manual \fBGNU Rush -- a restricted user shell\fR, available in texinfo
format.  If the \fBinfo\fR reader and the rush documentation are
properly installed on your system, the command
.PP
.RS +4
.B info rushlast
.RE
.PP
should give you access to the complete manual.
.PP
You can also view the manual using the info mode in
.BR emacs (1),
or find it in various formats online at
.PP
.RS +4
.B http://www.gnu.org.ua/software/rush/manual
.RE
.PP
If any discrepancies occur between this manpage and the
\fBManual\fR, the later shall be considered the authoritative
source.
.SH DESCRIPTION
Searches back through the GNU Rush database and displays a list of all
user sessions since the database was created.
.PP
The utility operates on the default accounting database,
which is maintained only if
.BR rush (1)
runs in accounting mode.
.SH OPTIONS
.TP
\fB\-F\fR, \fB\-\-format=\fISTRING\fR
Use \fISTRING\fR instead of the default format.  Use \fISTRING\fR
instead of the default format.  See the section \fBFORMAT\fR, for a
detailed discussion of the format syntax.  If the \fISTRING\fR begins
with a \fB@\fR, then this character is removed from it, and the
resulting string is regarded as a name of the file to read.  The file
is read literally, except that lines beginning with a semicolon are ignored. 
.TP
\fB\-f\fR, \fB\-\-file=\fIDIR\fR
Look for database files in \fIDIR\fR.
.TP
\fB\-\-forward\fR
Show entries in chronological order.
.TP
\fB\-H\fR, \fB\-\-no\-header\fR
Do not display header line.
.TP
\fB\-n\fR, \fB\-\-count=\fINUMBER\fR
Show at most \fINUMBER\fR records.
.PP
Other options
.TP
\fB-h\fR, \fB\-\-help\fR
Give this help list.
.TP
\fB\-\-usage\fR
Give a short usage message.
.TP
\fB\-\-version\fR
Print program version.
.SH ENVIRONMENT
.TP
.B RUSHLAST_FORMAT
When set, supplies a format string to use instead of the built-in
format.  If the value begins with a
.B @
sign, rest of characters is treated as the name of file to read the
format from, similarly to the \fB\-\-format\fR option, which see.
.sp
The precedence rule for format selection is:
.RS
.nr step 1 1
.IP \n[step].
The \fB\-\-format\fR option.
.IP \n+[step].
The \fBRUSHLAST_FORMAT\fR environment variable.
.IP \n+[step].
Built-in format.
.SH FORMATS
The format string supplied with the \fB\-F\fR (\fB\-\-format\fR)
option controls the output of every record from the GNU Rush
accounting database.  It consists of the following classes of
objects:
.TP
.I Ordinary characters
These are copied to the output verbatim.
.TP
.I Escapes
An escape is a backslash, followed by a single character.  It is
interpreted according to the following table:
.sp
.nf
.ta 8n 20n
.ul
	Sequence	Replaced with
	\\a	Audible bell character (ASCII 7)
	\\b	Backspace character (ASCII 8)
	\\e	Escape character (ASCII 27)
	\\f	Form-feed character (ASCII 12)
	\\n	Newline character (ASCII 10)
	\\r	Carriage return character (ASCII 13)
	\\t	Horizontal tabulation character (ASCII 9)
	\\v	Vertical tabulation character (ASCII 11)
	\\\\	A single backslash
	\\\(dq	A double-quote.
.fi
.sp
Any escape not listed in the table above results in its second
character being output.
.TP
.I Quoted strings
Strings are delimited by single or double quotes.  Within a string
escape sequences are interpreted as described above.
.TP
.I Format specifications
Format specification can be regarded as a kind of function, which outputs
a particular piece of information from the database record.
Syntactically, format specification starts with an opening brace and ends with
a closing brace.  The first word after the brace is the name of the
specification.  The rest of words are \fIpositional arguments\fR
followed by \fIkeyword arguments\fR.  Both are optional.  A keyword
argument begins with a colon.
.PP 
The available format specifications are:
.TP
\fB(newline\fR [\fICOUNT\fR]\fB)\fR
Causes the newline character to be output.  If the optional \fIcount\fR
is supplied, that many newlines will be printed
.TP
\fB(tab\fR [\fICOUNT\fR]\fB)\fR
Advance to the next tab stop in the output stream.  If optional \fICOUNT\fR
is present, then skip that many tab stops.  Each tab stop is eight
characters long.
.PP
The following specifications output particular fields of a database
record.  They all take two positional arguments: \fIWIDTH\fR and
\fITITLE\fR.
.PP
The first argument, \fIWIDTH\fR sets the maximum output
length for this specification.  If the number of characters actually output
is less than the width, they will be padded with whitespace either to
the left or to the right, depending on the presence of the \fB:right\fR
keyword argument.  If the number of characters is greater than
\fIWIDTH\fR, they will be truncated to fit.  If \fIWIDTH\fR is
not given, the exact data are output as is.
.PP
The second argument, \fITITLE\fR, gives the title of this column for
the heading line.  By default no title is output.
.PP
Every field specification accepts at least two keyword arguments.
The keyword \fB:right\fR may be used to request alignment to the right
for the data.  This keyword is ignored if \fIWIDTH\fR is not given.
.PP
The keyword \fB:empty\fR followed by a string causes the program
to output that string if the resulting value for this specification
would otherwise be empty.
.TP
\fB(user \fIWIDTH\fR \fITITLE\fR [\fB:empty\fR \fIREPL\fR][\fB:right\fR]\fB)\fR
Print the user login name.
.TP
\fB(start\-time \fIWIDTH\fR \fITITLE\fR [\fB:empty\fR \fIREPL\fR][\fB:right\fR][\fB:format\fI \fIDATE-FORMAT\fR]\fB)\fR
Date and time when the session started.

The \fB:format\fR keyword introduces the
.BR strftime (3)
format string to be used when converting the date for printing.  The
default value is \fB"%a %H:%M"\fR.
.TP
\fB(stop\-time \fIWIDTH\fR \fITITLE\fR [\fB:empty\fR \fIREPL\fR][\fB:right\fR][\fB:format\fI \fIDATE-FORMAT\fR]\fB)\fR
Time when the command finished.  If it is still running, the word
.B running
is output.
.TP
\fB(duration \fIWIDTH\fR \fITITLE\fR [\fB:empty\fR \fIREPL\fR][\fB:right\fR]\fB)\fR
Total time of the session duration.
.TP
\fB(rule \fIWIDTH\fR \fITITLE\fR [\fB:right\fR]\fB)\fR
The tag of the rule that was used to serve the user.  
.TP
\fB(command \fIWIDTH\fR \fITITLE\fR [\fB:empty\fR \fIREPL\fR][\fB:right\fR]\fB)\fR
Command line being executed.
.TP
\fB(pid \fIWIDTH\fR \fITITLE\fR [\fB:right\fR]\fB)\fR
PID of the process.
.PP
The default format is:
.PP
.EX
(user 10 Login)" "
(rule 8 Rule)" "
(start-time 0 Start)" "
(stop-time 0 Stop)" "
(duration 7 Time)" "
(command 32 Command)
.EE
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR rush (1),
.BR rushwho (1).
.SH AUTHORS
Sergey Poznyakoff
.SH "BUG REPORTS"
Report bugs to <bug-rush@gnu.org.ua>.
.SH COPYRIGHT
Copyright \(co 2016 Sergey Poznyakoff
.br
.na
License GPLv3+: GNU GPL version 3 or later <http://gnu.org/licenses/gpl.html>
.br
.ad
This is free software: you are free to change and redistribute it.
There is NO WARRANTY, to the extent permitted by law.
.\" Local variables:
.\" eval: (add-hook 'write-file-hooks 'time-stamp)
.\" time-stamp-start: ".TH [A-Z_][A-Z0-9_.\\-]* [0-9] \""
.\" time-stamp-format: "%:B %:d, %:y"
.\" time-stamp-end: "\""
.\" time-stamp-line-limit: 20
.\" end:
