.\" This file is part of GNU Rush.
.\" Copyright (C) 2016-2019 Sergey Poznyakoff
.\"
.\" GNU Rush is free software; you can redistribute it and/or modify
.\" it under the terms of the GNU General Public License as published by
.\" the Free Software Foundation; either version 3, or (at your option)
.\" any later version.
.\"
.\" GNU Rush is distributed in the hope that it will be useful,
.\" but WITHOUT ANY WARRANTY; without even the implied warranty of
.\" MERCHANTABILITY or FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.  See the
.\" GNU General Public License for more details.
.\"
.\" You should have received a copy of the GNU General Public License
.\" along with GNU Rush.  If not, see <http://www.gnu.org/licenses/>.
.TH RUSH-PO 1 "April 23, 2019" "RUSH-PO" "Rush User Reference"
.SH NAME
rush\-po \- extracts translatable strings from \fBrush\.rc\fR file
.SH SYNOPSIS
\fBrush\-po\fR\
 [\fB\-o \fIPOFILE\fR]\
 [\fB\-\-output=\fIPOFILE\fR]\
 \fIFILE\fR
.sp
\fBrush\-po \-h\fR | \fB\-\-help\fR
.SH DESCRIPTION
Extracts translatable strings from \fBrush\fR configuration file
\fIFILE\fR.
.PP
Produces on output a valid portable object (PO) file that can be
compiled into localization file using
.BR msgfmt (1).
.SH OPTIONS
.TP
\fB\-h, \fB\-\-help\fR
Print a short help summary and exit.
.TP
\fB\-o, \fB\-\-output=\fIFILE\fR
Write output to \fIFILE\fR, instead of the standard output.
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR rush.rc (5),
.BR rush (8),
.BR msgfmt (1).
.SH "BUG REPORTS"
Report bugs to <bug-rush@gnu.org>.
.SH COPYRIGHT
Copyright \(co 2019 Sergey Poznyakoff
.br
.na
License GPLv3+: GNU GPL version 3 or later <http://gnu.org/licenses/gpl.html>
.br
.ad
This is free software: you are free to change and redistribute it.
There is NO WARRANTY, to the extent permitted by law.
.\" Local variables:
.\" eval: (add-hook 'write-file-hooks 'time-stamp)
.\" time-stamp-start: ".TH [A-Z_][A-Z0-9_.\\-]* [0-9] \""
.\" time-stamp-format: "%:B %:d, %:y"
.\" time-stamp-end: "\""
.\" time-stamp-line-limit: 20
.\" end:
